---
title: "In Which I Say Goodbye to My Father"
date: 2011-09-06T14:04:50-05:00
draft: true
---

Amy and I were getting ready to go to a barbecue for our friend Megan Murray on Sunday. I had been up since 7 AM to play for worship at Mars Hill Federal Way. It had been a good day, but tiring, and I didn’t want to stay too late at the barbecue. I was sort of planning for afterward and what we would need to get done so that we could have a bit of a day off on Monday, and I was still worn out from fighting off a cold on Friday and Saturday.

We were about to leave for the barbecue when my phone rang. I was standing in the kitchen next to the sink and pulled out my phone. I didn’t recognize the number, but I had been putting out a few applications to see if I could find a better job, so I thought a Seattle number might mean a follow-up call. I pressed the answer button on my phone. “Hi, this is Jesse,” I said.

“Jess, it’s Mom.” Her voice was breaking.

“Hi, Mom. What’s up?” I asked. I was already alarmed. She wouldn’t sound like this unless something was very wrong. I had heard her sound like this once before, when she called to let me know that my uncle Mike, her brother, had died.

“Dad’s in the ICU.” She choked back a sob. “The doctors say it doesn’t look good.”

My heart froze. “So we need to get there right now.” It wasn’t a question. I was already thinking through getting ready to go.

“If you want to,” she said. As if I had a choice in the matter. Of course we were coming. “We’re at UW Medical Center, 5 East.”

“We’ll be there in a little while,” I said. My mind was starting to race and I forced myself to concentrate, to think about the task at hand of getting to the hospital. The emotions would hit later, and I wouldn’t be able to stem the tide forever, but I could stop them now and I had to do so in order to get to Mom and Dad.

We hung up and I turned to Amy. She knew from my half of the conversation that things were not good. I filled her in on the other half. Because we had already been prepping to go, we were able to walk out the door and get in the car without much delay. I grabbed my phone and a spare battery, thanking God that I had taken advantage of an online deal for them. At the time it had seemed mildly frivolous, but possibly useful. Now it was like a gift from God. Somewhere on the way out the door I skinned my knuckles, probably swinging too wide in a doorway, but I didn’t think much of it.

“Do you need me to drive?” Amy asked. “No,” I said, “I think I need to.” Mostly, I needed something to think about other than the things that were threatening to send me directly into a panic. We got in the car and headed north. I think we may have had some kind of conversation, but I don’t remember much of it. I wanted the radio on, because I didn’t want to think about anything other than driving and getting there.

We pulled into the parking lot and found a space. As soon as we stopped the car I started to cry, and my body started shaking. Amy waited for a bit, and then gently said, “We should go in.” I knew she was right. We got directions to the ICU at the front desk and headed to the elevators. At the ICU, I called the front desk and the nurse had me talk to Mom. They let me in and Amy and I walked back toward the room. On the way, we found my uncle Mike, Dad’s brother, and he hugged us.

Nothing could have prepared me for the sight when we got to the doorway. Dad was laying on a bed surrounded by what seemed like half of the hospital staff, and Mom was standing next to him. A fair amount of dried blood was on his hospital gown, and the amount of activity in the room was shocking. I walked in and over to Mom and saw that Dad was on a ventilator, and had God knows how many IVs pouring into him. His eyes were open but he didn’t seem to be looking at anything, and we couldn’t tell whether he was conscious or not. His eyes were a pale yellow rather than white, and his left eye seemed to be badly swollen such that it puffed out in a grotesque way around the iris. He wasn’t moving except for his chest moving up and down with the ventilator. Amy stood in the doorway and motioned that she would take AJ out to the waiting room, and I nodded.

I couldn’t really gather much of what the doctors and nurses were saying, but I didn’t need to understand any of the terminology to know that this many people in a room meant nothing good. There was a tube that was pumping blood into a receptacle about the size of a large yogurt container, and it was nearly full. Several doctors who weren’t directly working on Dad introduced themselves to me and Mom. I nodded blankly through their names, knowing that I wouldn’t remember them and not even making an attempt to do so. (I can see all their faces, and will probably remember them all for the rest of my life, but they will remain nameless to me.) There was a polite young Asian resident with a relatively strong accent; a professorial ICU doctor with a growing crown line, a graying beard, and glasses, who personified calm in the face of great distress; the GI specialist, a young Indian woman, who it appeared had seen Dad before and knew his history well; another female resident with strawberry blonde hair and a deeply sympathetic manner.

The gastrointestinal specialist spoke to me and Mom, introducing herself. “Mr. and Mrs. Carrigan,” she began. “No”, I corrected her, misunderstanding, “Mr. Carrigan is my father.” “Right,” she agreed, “the other Mr. Carrigan.” She explained that what they believed had happened was that Dad had experienced esophageal variceal bleeding, which they were trying to stop. Due to liver function problems such as sclerosing cholangitis and cirrhosis (which Dad had for some time), the blood vessels surrounding the esophagus had become enlarged and they suspected that one of them had ruptured. The normal procedure to correct this was to put a scope in and try to close off the blood vessel, but Dad was in such a fragile state that the risk of doing so was too high; if they tried to do so now, it could stop his heart and they would be unable to revive him because of the bleeding. They wanted to get the bleeding under control and then try to determine a next step. However, Dad’s numbers were not good, and despite their efforts to get his bleeding under control they had not been successful yet. He hadn’t even been sedated during all the time they had been working; he just hadn’t moved. He was still breathing, and his heart was still beating, and they hadn’t given up, but the doctors gave us no illusions; Dad was in very dire straits.

So much of the rest of the night is a blur, and my memories are vignettes rather than a continuous story. I told Amy what was happening, and cried. My aunt Joanne came, and we talked, and cried. At some point I had run out of tears for a while and was sad, but couldn’t cry. Amy’s Mom came to help with Aravis, and hugged me, and told me in no uncertain terms that I needed to leave nothing unsaid. I knew she had lost her dad and knew that I was possibly near losing mine, and that I might very well need the advice. At about 6:30, someone suggested that we go down to the cafeteria and get something to eat if we wanted to, because they were closing at 7. Amy said, “We should get something for your mom.” I agreed, and went to ask Mom if she wanted anything. She looked at me with eyes red from crying and said, “Thank you, Jess, but I just don’t think I could eat.”

I went down to get her something anyway.

Mom asked one of the doctors whether Dad was conscious or not, and he said no. Dad was probably in a delirium or a coma; the blood gasses would have built up in his brain from the blood loss. The doctor checked Dad’s pupils with a flashlight, and they didn’t respond. He didn’t like that at all, and was concerned about Dad’s brain function. Because of all the machinery, they couldn’t do an ECG, but the immediate prognosis wasn’t good.

At about 7:45 PM, Mike said that the doctors wanted to meet with the family. My stomach turned to ice. I knew that when this happened in movies, things had taken a turn for the worse and the doctors wanted to inform the family exactly where things were. In this instance, art imitates life quite well.

The doctors went over the same explanation about what they thought had happened, and where things stood. Additionally, they said that Dad’s brain and other organs had probably sustained significant injury due to blood loss and shock. Even if he survived this crisis, which was becoming increasingly doubtful, it was highly questionable whether he would survive the subsequent procedures and hospital stay.

They finally asked the thing that we knew they would ask, but were dreading: did we know what Dad’s wishes were concerning continuing treatment, given the situation? Mom said that he wouldn’t have wanted to come to the hospital at all, and it was only because she compelled him that they came in anyway, so he wouldn’t have wanted to continue. I agreed, because we had actually talked on Fathers’ Day about where his health was and he had said he wasn’t interested in doing a transplant or a long hospital stay. Even so, it was an awful thought to consider that we might have to say that it was time to stop fighting.

The doctors left us to talk and make a decision about whether to continue trying to fight or to let him go. Mom, Amy, Mike, Joanne and I sat there in silence for a little while. At some point, Mike broke the ice and we started to talk about it. We prayed, and Mom felt that we should wait a little longer, and see where things were stood around 9 PM. It was about 5 minutes before 8 at that point.

I brought Aravis in to see Dad, and Mom smiled when we came in. “Aravis is here to see you, Tim,” she said to Dad. AJ looked around, seemingly confused. I doubt she recognized Dad with all the machinery surrounding him. I thought of how she had smiled at him when he held her, loving her grandpa with all her little heart, and he loving her back as only a grandfather could. He was so proud of her, and had enjoyed her so much. This could be the last time she saw him. She would be too young to remember their time together. I sobbed as I held her, my tears wetting her hair.

Mom and Mike were on the phone trying to reach Holly and Hannah off and on for a while. Eventually Mom talked to Holly. I could hear the agony from Mom’s side of the conversation, trying to tell Holly that it was possible that Dad might not make it and that the end might be very soon. Holly was in Alaska and couldn’t fly back until the next day, and so Mom held the phone to Dad’s ear and Holly talked to him. I could hear her the grief that she was feeling in her voice, but not what she said.

Hannah had arrived with her boyfriend Aton and talked to Mom. Because of Mom’s request to wait until 9, she had time to get there. “When did this happen?” she asked Mom through tears.  Mom explained what had happened.

Mom asked if I was able to send an email to Tony from my phone, and I let him know what was going on. I hoped against hope that he would be able to call back, but I had no idea if he would get it in time. He happened to check his email right before going to class, and called me back. Mom held my phone to Dad’s ear and Tony spoke to Dad, but I couldn’t hear him. Hannah was saying to Aton how Dad had just the other day been talking about soloing a mountain, perhaps Mt. Whitney in CA.

At some point, I talked to Dad for a while and told him the things that I wanted him to know before we parted. “Dad,” I said “I love you and I want you to know how proud I am to be your son. I’ve never known anyone who had a word to say against you. I’m grateful that you taught me how to work. Thank you for being so patient with me, in ways I didn’t understand when I was a kid, but I get now that I’m an adult. I remember all that time that you were gone so much working in the woods, and I didn’t understand it then but I do now. You were loving us and taking care of us in the best way that you were able to. Thank you most of all for teaching me about Jesus. I remember all the times when I was sick, and you would pray for me…I’m so glad you got to meet AJ. I’m going to miss you so much.” I couldn’t talk anymore. The nurses had turned on the radio, and the song that came on right then was Chris Tomlin’s “I Will Rise”. That song will probably provoke tears in me for the rest of my life, now with sadness, but someday with joy.

I gave Hannah some time with Dad so she could do the same thing. I went back out into the hallway and saw some of our friends who worked with Mom and Dad. Don and Joann Tracy were there, and Butch and Laurie Olson, and Mike Wilkins. They asked how Dad was, and I relayed to them what was happening. The shock on their faces was evident. I went back in to check with Mom and see if it was okay for them to come back, and she welcomed them.

I stood with Mom most of the night. I have no idea whether she wanted me there, but I couldn’t find it in my heart to leave them. I felt that if Dad could feel and hear us, that I should be there. I knew that Mom was hurting. I couldn’t leave them there. Blood was oozing from Dad’s nose, and I knew that probably meant that it had backed up through his esophagus around the ventilator. At that point, I knew he wasn’t going to make it. Everything after was simply waiting for the inevitable. Mom cleaned it with a towel as best she could, with Dad’s blood coating her fingers.

We let the doctors know what Dad wanted, and they said that they understood and supported us. Amy stood by me, near the foot of the bed, with Mom near Dad’s head and Hannah on his right. One of the doctors gave Dad some pain medication through one of the IVs, squeezed Dad’s hand kindly, and left the room. A nurse switched out the ventilator tube for something that would just provide air and not the full function of the ventilator. It was just the five of us, with my other siblings in the distance and Jesus close by, as Dad took his last breath, and his pulse slowed, then began to fade. I watched it ebbing in his neck, and sobbed, knowing he was leaving us and we were going to go home without him. We stood there for what seemed like hours. The doctor came back in, and gently said to us, “his heart has stopped beating.” Mom kissed Dad’s forehead, and closed his eyes. Hannah whispered, “goodbye, Daddy,” and left the room. I stayed with Mom for a while longer.

Eventually, she left the room too, to talk with the friends who had come and were standing outside the door. Amy and I were standing there, and Uncle Mike came back in. He talked to me and Amy about making sure that Mom was okay, and some of the other things that needed to be taken care of. I glanced back, and Dad’s body lay on the hospital bed as he had been there throughout the day. It was so strange, because I knew he wasn’t there, but he looked like he was just sleeping.

I knew Dad was gone, but it was hard to fathom it. It felt wrong to leave him now, even though I knew he wasn’t really there anymore. He had fought the good fight; he had finished the race; he had kept the faith. He had more mountains to climb, more hills to ski, more time to spend with his family. He surely would have done so, had his body not betrayed him. I had hoped that he and I and AJ would hike together, but we will have to wait for eternity before that happens. There were so many stories I wanted to hear, so many things I wanted to ask him, so much I wanted to learn from him about being a dad, so much I hoped we would get to do together.

Papa, I miss you deeply. I’m conflicted because I’m so glad that you are well and so sad that you are gone from us. I wish that AJ could remember you, and how much you loved her, but I know she won’t. I love you, and I thank God for the hope we have in Christ that someday we will get to be together again, and we’ll do all the things we didn’t have a chance to do.
